OSDOCS-7308: run MicroShift on disconnected host (#70065)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/microshift-disconnected-host-procedure.adoc

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ NAME="$(hostnamectl hostname)"
----

. Add an entry for the hostname of the node in the `/etc/hosts` file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ echo "$IP $NAME" | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts >/dev/null
----

. Update the {microshift-short} configuration file by adding the following YAML snippet to `/etc/microshift/config.yaml`:
+
[source,terminal]
----
sudo tee /etc/microshift/config.yaml > /dev/null <<EOF
node:
  hostnameOverride: hostnameOverride: $(echo $NAME)
  nodeIP: $(echo $IP)
EOF
----

. {microshift-short} is now ready to use the loopback device for cluster communications. Finish preparing the device for offline use.

.. If the device currently has a NIC attached, disconnect the device from the network.
.. Shut down the device and disconnect the NIC.
.. Restart the device for the offline configuration to take effect.

. Restart the {microshift-short} host to apply the configuration changes by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo systemctl reboot <1>
----
<1> This step restarts the cluster. Wait for the greenboot health check to report the system healthy before implementing verification.

.Verification

> At this point, network access to the {microshift-short} host has been severed. Use the host CLI to verify that the cluster has started in a stable state.

Reviewer: We should mention that the state of the cluster can only be verified if the user has access to the device terminal.  Something like:

```suggestion
At this point, network access to the {microshift-short} host has been severed. If you have access to the host terminal, you can use the host CLI to verify that the cluster has started in a stable state.
```

= Configuring the networking settings for fully disconnected hosts

To configure the networking settings for running {microshift-short} on a fully disconnected host, you must prepare the host, update the networking configuration, then restart to apply the new settings. All commands are executed from the host CLI.

.Prerequisites
* RHEL 9 or newer.
* {microshift-short} 4.14 or newer.
* Access to the host CLI.
* A valid IP address chosen to avoid both internal and potential future external IP conflicts when running {microshift-short}.
* {microshift-short} networking settings are set to defaults.

[IMPORTANT]
====
The following procedure is for use cases in which access to the {microshift-short} cluster is not required after devices are deployed in the field. There is no remote cluster access after the network connection is removed.
====

.Procedure

. Add a fake IP address to the loopback interface by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ IP="10.44.0.1" <1>
$ sudo nmcli con add type loopback con-name stable-microshift ifname lo ip4 ${IP}/32
----
<1> The fake IP address used in this example is “10.44.0.1”.
+
[NOTE]
====

> Any valid IP works, as long as it avoids both internal {microshift-short} and potential future external IP conflicts. This can be any subnet that does not collide with the {microshift-short} node subnet or is be accessed by other services on the device.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any valid IP works, if it avoids both internal {microshift-short} and potential future external IP conflicts. This can be any subnet that does not collide with the {microshift-short} node subnet or is be accessed by other services on the device.
```

Reviewer 2: Personally, I LIKE "as long as", but lordy the style guide doesn't. https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=word-usage#as-long-as

[source,terminal]
----
$ IP="10.44.0.1" <1>
$ sudo nmcli con add type loopback con-name stable-microshift ifname lo ip4 ${IP}/32
----
<1> The fake IP address used in this example is “10.44.0.1”.
+
[NOTE]
====
Any valid IP works, as long as it avoids both internal {microshift-short} and potential future external IP conflicts. This can be any subnet that does not collide with the {microshift-short} node subnet or is be accessed by other services on the device.
====

. Configure the DNS interface to use the local name server by setting modifying the settings to ignore automatic DNS and reset it to the local name server:
+
.. Bypass the automatic DNS by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo nmcli conn modify stable-microshift ipv4.ignore-auto-dns yes
----
+
.. Point the DNS interface to use the local name server:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo nmcli conn modify stable-microshift ipv4.dns "10.44.1.1"
----

. Get the hostname of the device by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ NAME="$(hostnamectl hostname)"
----

. Add an entry for the hostname of the node in the `/etc/hosts` file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ sudo echo "$IP $NAME" >> /etc/hosts

Reviewer 3: This command responds with permission denied. 

I am suggesting
`echo "$IP $NAME" | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts >/dev/null`

----

. Update the {microshift-short} configuration file by adding the following YAML snippet to `/etc/microshift/config.yaml`:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> sudo cat <<EOF >> /etc/microshift/config.yaml

Reviewer 3: This is going to have the permission denied issue.

I am suggesting

`sudo tee /etc/microshift/config.yaml > /dev/null <<EOF 
node:
  hostnameOverride: $(echo $NAME)
  nodeIP: $(echo $IP)
EOF`

node:
  hostnameOverride: “$NAME”
  nodeIP: “$IP”
EOF
----

. If the device currently has a NIC attached, it can be removed. Determine the interface with the default route by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ IFACE=$(ip route | grep default | awk '{print $5}')
----

. Stop external network access by running the following commands:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo nmcli connection modify $IFACE connection.autoconnect no
----
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ sudo nmcli connection down $IFACE

Reviewer 3: @ShaunaDiaz This is kind of dangerous. If a user is connected via SSH into the box, and they execute this command, they have just lost connectivity to the MicroShift cluster. I want to make sure I am not missing a step above.

Author: @copejon Could you address the comment, please? Should we caveat, or use a different technique here?

Reviewer: @dhensel-rh I see the same.  Doesn't look like the suggestion stuck

> . If the device currently has a NIC attached, it can be removed. Determine the interface with the default route by running the following command:
> +
> [source,terminal]
> ----
> $ IFACE=$(ip route | grep default | awk '{print $5}')
> ----
> 
> . Stop external network access by running the following commands:
> +
> [source,terminal]
> ----
> $ sudo nmcli connection modify $IFACE connection.autoconnect no
> ----
> +
> [source,terminal]
> ----
> $ sudo nmcli connection down $IFACE

Reviewer: @dhensel-rh That's a good point.  WDYT about this instead:

```suggestion
+ . MicroShift is now ready to use the loopback device for cluster communications.  The device can now be disconnected from the network. Shutdown the device and disconnect the NIC.  Start the device for the offline configuration to take effect.
```

Reviewer 3: @copejon That sentence sounds good. Since a reboot is imminent in the next line, this should be ok.

> ----
> 
> . Restart the {microshift-short} host to apply the configuration changes by running the following command:
> +

Reviewer: This sentence would be overlapped by the suggested change above.

```suggestion
```

[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo systemctl reboot <1>
----
<1> This step restarts the cluster. Wait for the greenboot health check to report the system healthy before implementing verification.

.Verification

At this point, network access to the {microshift-short} host has been severed. Use the host CLI to verify that the cluster has started in a stable state.

. Verify that the {microshift-short} cluster is running by entering the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ export KUBECONFIG=/var/lib/microshift/resources/kubeadmin/kubeconfig
$ sudo -E oc get pods -A
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----

> NAMESPACE                  NAME                                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS      AGE
> kube-system                csi-snapshot-controller-74d566564f-66n2f   1/1     Running   0             24h
> kube-system                csi-snapshot-webhook-69bdff8879-xs6mb      1/1     Running   0             24h
> openshift-dns              dns-default-dxglm                          2/2     Running   0             24h
> openshift-dns              node-resolver-dbf5v                        1/1     Running   0             24h
> openshift-ingress          router-default-8575d888d8-xmq9p            1/1     Running   0             24h
> openshift-ovn-kubernetes   ovnkube-master-gcsx8                       4/4     Running   1 (24h ago)   24h
> openshift-ovn-kubernetes   ovnkube-node-757mf                         1/1     Running   1 (24h ago)   24h
> openshift-service-ca       service-ca-7d7c579f54-68jt4                1/1     Running   0             24h
> openshift-storage          topolvm-controller-6d777f795b-bx22r        5/5     Running   0             24h
> openshift-storage          topolvm-node-fcf8l                         4/4     Running   0             24h

Reviewer: Woops. Output show reflect that cluster just started, rather than being up for 24hrs prior 😅  
```suggestion
NAMESPACE                  NAME                                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS      AGE
kube-system                csi-snapshot-controller-74d566564f-66n2f   1/1     Running   0             1m
kube-system                csi-snapshot-webhook-69bdff8879-xs6mb      1/1     Running   0             1m
openshift-dns              dns-default-dxglm                          2/2     Running   0             1m
openshift-dns              node-resolver-dbf5v                        1/1     Running   0             1m
openshift-ingress          router-default-8575d888d8-xmq9p            1/1     Running   0             1m
openshift-ovn-kubernetes   ovnkube-master-gcsx8                       4/4     Running   1             1m
openshift-ovn-kubernetes   ovnkube-node-757mf                         1/1     Running   1             1m
openshift-service-ca       service-ca-7d7c579f54-68jt4                1/1     Running   0             1m
openshift-storage          topolvm-controller-6d777f795b-bx22r        5/5     Running   0             1m
openshift-storage          topolvm-node-fcf8l                         4/4     Running   0             1m
```
